Studies showed that if you are flossing,
you can reduce your risk of dementia by
nearly half, which is quite impressive.
So I started to research the [music]
brain much more and it made me realize
this link with the brain and the gut is
absolutely crucial and how that
influences [music] many things in our
brain. For example, things like
depression, mood changes, fatigue and
energy. But for 40 years, we've been
going down the wrong path. We've [music]
got so distracted by treating the brain
as something so different to the rest of
the body. So, what do we do about it if
we want to have optimally healthy
brains? So, Professor Tim Spectre is
[music] one of the top 100 most cited
scientists worldwide, and he's back to
reveal the [music] critical role our gut
plays with our physical and mental
health,
>> our cognition, and the prevention of
chronic disease.
>> We can dramatically improve our lives
and our health just by making the right
[music] food choices. And I've got eight
rules for gut health which work for all
health. So, first thing, pivot your
protein. Then there's quality, not
[music] calories. The whole idea of
assessing food by calories is wrong.
Calorie restricted diets have been shown
for the vast [music] majority of people
not to work. Your hunger signals go up.
And hunger is the main driver of
obesity. And we'll get into the other
rules.
>> And what about coffee?
>> So drinking between two and five cups of
coffee reduces your risk of heart
disease by about 25%.
>> And then what do you think of almonds?
>> So there's lots of studies showing that
they're good for your cognition and
mood. And what about your views [music]
on GLP1s like Zen?
>> I think from a public health
perspective, they're going to transform
medicine [music] and we ought to be
taking it much more seriously. But I've
got two real worries about them. [music]
My first worry is that
Listen, my my team gave me a script that
they asked me to read, but I'm just
going to ask you um in the nicest way I
possibly can. Thank you first and
foremost for choosing to subscribe to
this channel. It is um it's been one of
the most incredible crazy years of my
life. I never could have imagined. I had
so many dreams in my life, but this was
not one of them. And the very fact that
these conversations have resonated with
you and you've given me so much feedback
is something I will always be
appreciative of. And I almost carry away
a sort of burden of uh responsibility to
pay you back. And the favor I would like
to ask from you today is to subscribe to
the channel if you um would be so
obliged. It's completely free to do
that. Roughly about 47% of you that
listen to this channel frequently
currently don't subscribe to this
channel. So if you're one of those
people, please come and join us. Hit the
subscribe button. It's the single free
thing you can do to make this channel
better. And every subscriber sort of
pays into this show and allows us to do
things bigger and better and to push
ourselves even more. And I will not let
you down if you hit the subscribe
button. I promise you. And if I do,
please do unsubscribe, but I promise I
won't. Thank you. [music]
>> [music]
>> Professor Tim Spectre.
Who is um who's this lovely lady and how
does she tie into the work you're
focused on right now?
>> That's my lovely mom, June, who is still
with us, age 93. Wow. but for the last
seven years has been in a in a home in
London after suffering a stroke and uh
then developing dementia
and so um yeah that's um changed
some of my views on life and uh she was
really pro- uh euthanasia and signed
every paper possible that if this ever
happened to her you know she would be
able to end her life but Unfortunately,
that didn't come true and under UK law,
it's not possible to to help her in that
because she lost capability and mobility
very early. So, she's still there, but
she doesn't no longer recognizes me. And
um it's it's a reminder of you know our
potential
future life and uh how so many so many
people in the are going to end up with
dementia that wasn't the case 50 years
ago.
>> [snorts]
>> If I can do something to reverse this
epidemic of dementia, then that's really
motivating for me and in a way one
reason why I've started to research the
brain much more than I I've done in the
past.
>> So, is dementia
increasing or is it that we know of it
more now? So, we're better at diagnosing
it.
>> It's increasing for a number of reasons.
So some of it is the age demographic. So
we're living longer,
>> but we're not living healthier. So our
health span hasn't really increased, but
our lifespan has. We're good at keeping
elderly people alive longer. That's
definitely true, but there's also stats
to show that it is increasing even when
you take that into account. So that more
people are developing uh dementia than
ever before, even when you account for
the demographics. and those other
changes. So, it is a major worry and I
think it's one of the the major fears
that all of us have. You know, obviously
you've got cancer is one fear, but I
think the other really bad one is ending
up with dementia because nearly everyone
knows somebody with dementia.
>> Did this inspire you to go get your own
brain scanned?
>> Yes, I'd had, as you know, problems with
my brain before. I'd had a mini stroke
back in 2011
and
never really worked out the causes of
that. I knew I had some white spots in
my brain. I wanted to see if they were
still there, if there were any signs of
that. And at the same time, I wanted to
get a checkup to see was I likely to end
up like my mother or not. And did I have
the genetic form of the disease? Was it
a straightforward Alzheimer's or was it
more the vascular type that my mother
had or probably has?
And so yeah, partly it was motivated out
of my cur my medical curiosity and
partly for self-interest.
>> And what did you find? I went to this
specialized clinic in London that does
these dementia screens, so I know if I
had the risk genes for Alzheimer's,
which luckily I don't. Um, but I do have
bad genes for diabetes and heart
disease, which predispose you to the
vascular side of things.
>> What's vascular dementia?
>> There's several types of dementia, but
the two main ones are Alzheimer's, where
you get these protein folds in the
brain. you get local inflammation, these
protein tangles, and that then causes
these damage to the bits of the brain.
That's a very specific type of dementia.
Then you get more generalized dementia,
which is usually called vascular
dementia, where you're just getting
clogging up of the arteries supplying
the brain just like you do in the heart.
And that knocks off other bits of the
brain
uh in a slightly more random way than
happens uh with Alzheimer's. Slightly
less predictable, but [gasps] that
accounts for about a third of all
dementia is this vascular time. I'm
predisposed to it because after my this
weird episode in 2011, my blood pressure
went up. So anyone with high blood
pressure generally has slightly stiffer
arteries than most people and that
impacts the arteries in your brain. So,
you are slightly more at risk. And with
these diabetes genes that I've got,
thanks to my grandmother, I am more at
risk of vascular dementia. And so, what
I wanted to do was learn about that in
order to
optimize all the things I could do to
postpone it or prevent it as much as
possible.
>> Over the last 5 years or so, your
interest in the brain has increased.
What what is the the the variance in
your views of the brain now versus five
years ago before you started doing
research and getting interested in it?
>> I think I saw the brain as a rather
distinct organ
that
uh was the domain of psychiatry and you
know perhaps gerontologists who look at
dementia that wasn't really part of the
major picture and certainly wasn't
within my domain of expertise. I think I
still believe in this the cartesian view
of the difference between the mind and
the brain the mind and the body
that these two separate entities and
you've got this barrier between them
this blood brain barrier that was really
like an iron curtain. So I I was
interested in it but I didn't realize
this huge connection I've now discovered
really that um has really excited me and
I think the thing that triggered it was
some of our own experiments which
happened a bit by chance. So when we
started Zoey, we did a number of trials
and we gave our participants apps so
they could report how they felt. In
every study we did, we started getting
back these incredible results of people
saying when they were when they started
the Zoey diet, for example, the first
thing they noticed was their mood and
energy improved and their hunger uh got
less. And that was before any blood
changes, before any gut changes. And so
initially we slightly discounted it, but
it happened in every study we did. We'd
looked at the menopause. And again, the
most dramatic change when people were
improving their gut health through food
with menopausal symptoms was was on mood
and energy. Because originally I'm a
rheatologist uh and was really
interested in inflammation. I'd never
put that connection between what was
inflammation in the body and in your
joints with what was going on in your
brain. And suddenly the latest science
when I'm going away you doing my reading
is making it all so so much clearer.
It's it's really become,
you know, this this new idea of things
like depression, things like mood
changes, things like fatigue and energy,
which I hadn't really thought about as
in a way a malfunction of the brain,
responding the wrong way to signals from
the rest of the body. But it it suddenly
all comes into focus about how holistic
the whole system is and how really the
brain is just another organ. And this
link with the gut is absolutely crucial
because that's where it gets most of its
information from. You know, we have this
vagus nerve that goes from our gut to
our brain, the longest nerve in the
body. And 80% of the signals go gut to
brain. Only 20% go brain to gut.
So all these things together have just
made me realize how important what going
into our gut is, our diet is, and how
that influences many things in our brain
that I didn't put together before. And I
don't think most most of the medical
world have put together before. And it
we've all got the brain on a pedestal, I
should say. You know, we we think it's
this some this unique thing that's
driving our bodies, but actually it's
not. It's just responding to them just
like any other organ.
It made me reflect on the days that I've
had like good and bad moods and how
how much it's linked to my diet in the
preceding couple of days like how I
feel. If I sleep is such a big
exacerbating factor in how I feel, but
if I'm slept and I still don't feel
good, it's typically linked I think to
something I've been eating or something
I've eaten very recently maybe in the
last 24 hours. So when you talk about
how there's this holistic picture and
how my brain might be I think I can't
remember the words you used but but it
sounded like you said my brain is
receiving signals from other parts of my
body and it's kind of malfunctioning
based on those signals which is causing
depression, anxiety, bad moods,
whatever. That I think is really
interesting because people think of mood
as a separate thing. We don't think of
mood connected to my gut.
>> No, it's it's your own fault. You're in
a bad mood. Why are you in a bad mood?
>> Something happened.
>> Yeah.
>> Externally. So someone cut you off in
traffic or whatever it might be. all
these studies, you know, we've got four
studies now where we're changing
people's diets and they're going,
they've been on generally bad diets,
we've moved them to good diets that mood
and particularly energy levels,
the first thing they noticed, they're
improving. And they never linked, just
like you, their mood and energy levels
with things like diet. It was just
inherent. They thought, "Oh, it's just
cuz I'm, you know, my life's or
whatever it is." An extreme example is
some families we've been working with
doing a channel 4 series at the moment
called What Not to Eat and we visit four
families and they're terrible diets and
we transform them, give them a gut
friendly
makeover diet. Look at them after 6
weeks. The first thing they all notice
is their mood and energy is dramatically
increased. They were napping all the
time. They were asleep all the time
during the day.
>> What were they eating?
>> Crap food. Highly processed crap food
and snacking late at night. Bars of
chocolate, you know, sodas, chicken
nuggets, pot noodles, rubbish food,
right? So, these were more worse than
your average, but still there's millions
of people like that doing this. And they
had no clue that it was linked to them
feeling terrible and tired all the time.
And again the first thing that improved
was what was going on in their brains
and they suddenly felt alert again. And
once people realize there's connection
then in a way you'd have this feedback
loop to say okay I'm not going to eat
this food you know because I know
it's making me feel so sick. But until
you make that connection you're not
going to know. you'll just be in this
constant state saying, well, you know,
I'm just overweight, that's why I'm
tired. Uh, or I'm not exercising, that's
why I'm tired. There's a bit of a
vicious cycle here with eating something
bad, then being low energy and sleeping
all day, not feeling good. So, you eat
something bad and the cycle continues.
Cuz if I don't feel good, I probably
want to eat a chocolate bar. In our Zoe
studies, we found that people who had a
bad night's sleep desperately craved
some sugary crap in the morning. Right?
It's the first you don't go for a
healthy breakfast. It's like there's
some little evil thing in your brain
saying, "Um, okay, I need a quick fix. I
don't care about the rest of the day.
Just get me through the next hour."
>> Do you know Do you know what that I had
someone posit on my podcast that um that
was because your body's basically under
a form of stress. So from an
evolutionary perspective, if if you're
waking up in the middle of the night for
some reason or you weren't sleeping
properly, it might be because you were
under threat. So your brain wants
energy. So there a lot of studies now
that stress, which we thought of as a
sort of external
psychological event, is actually a
physiological one and is actually
driving inflammation. It's directly
affecting your immune system, which is
then sending these signals to your brain
to change your behavior. And this I
think is very much the heart of what
seems to be happening, you know, in
depression.
What I've been finding out is that it's
detecting a change in the immune system.
It's switching on to the stress mode.
And the stress mode then triggers these
different behaviors in your brain. And
very often it's not, you know, real
stress. I mean most of the stresses we
get it every day are not like our
ancestors had. Uh we're not being chased
by wild animals or um being burnt out of
our village, you know. So the and what
really interested me was this whole link
between what happens when uh you have a
vaccination. During Zoe, we looked at a
million people's responses to the if you
remember the the FISA and uh vaccine and
the SK vaccine. And what was really
interesting was that uh people were
actually depressed during that time. So
you had about 24 hours of depression
which was mimicking
um a more constant threat. And this
suddenly brought home this idea that you
can trigger depression through a little
shift in your immune system. There's a
really growing theory about people who
have long-term depression is that these
their immune changes are switched on so
that they're getting the equivalent of
this constant tickling of the immune
system by a vaccine. So that to me is
was was a really important thing because
I I have vaccines. I have regular
vaccines. I'm big believer in vaccines,
but they do make you feel a little bit
down. That makes sense cuz your blood
tests will show a spike in your proteins
for inflammation. Your immune system's
kicking in. That sends signals to your
brain. Your brain says, "Okay, I looks
like I've got an illness coming here."
That illness behavior in some people
then gets carried on
for months or years. And this is now
developing this whole new theory of of
why uh people are depressed which isn't
the old theory of it's just due to a
chemical imbalance. It's actually
your body responding abnormally to a you
know a normal response. It's it thinks
it's under attack. Your brain thinks
it's under attack. It should then shut
down and protect you. This I find
fascinating that we're now linking so
much to the immune system and it's the
immune basis of things of mental and
brain diseases is becoming incredibly
important. I'm sure you've talked on the
podcast a lot about inflamming and the
role of controlling the immune system
because if your immune system is out of
control you inflammation levels are high
your body can't repair itself. So aging
happens faster in the brain. All of
these things are pointing to
inflammation being crucial to
everything, but particularly in all
aspects of brain health. And when I went
and looked, you can really find that the
immune system has a role in every brain
disease they've ever looked at. And yet
we've missed it because we've been so
obsessed with new, you know, the way
that Prozac works by it just being about
serotonin
uh or dopamine. And for 40 years, we've
been going down the wrong path and
missing this holistic view that actually
it's it's about inflammation
paired with metabolism. Because the
other big player here is and the reason
a lot of people get dementia is blood
sugar is not well controlled and the the
energy supply to the brain is not well
controlled. So those two things for me
have
transformed my view of of brain health.
And I used to study genetics as you know
and it was always interesting that in um
when we looked at twins which were
usually very similar for most things
when we looked at um brain diseases
there was very little similarity in the
twins. So the genetic component was
always quite small apart from a few
diseases. Most of them were really
low-level uh what we call heritability.
And there was a massive study in um
Sweden. They looked at several million
sibling pairs and s looked at all their
mental health or brain diseases I prefer
to call them. And there was no gene that
really came out even in several million
people that explained these disease
other than a general tendency
to get any type of brain disease.
So they called you know this like factor
P. Um, if you had this general
susceptibility, you could get any
disease, but that could be mania,
depression, bipolar, ADHD, it could be
Alzheimer's, it could be schizophrenia,
which which suddenly changes your whole
view of these these diseases. We've said
these are individual um diseases that
should always be looked at separately.
And if you start thinking of this as the
brain as a an organ just like anything
else like it was the liver, you'd say,
okay, we talk about liver disease, you
know, how do you prevent liver disease?
We never talk about that in brain
disease. We just say, okay,
[clears throat] you got to talk about
manic depression differently to uh ADHD
or personality disorder or epilepsy or
whatever it is. But it turns out that
not only have the similar genes, but
really similar risk factors as well.
I've heard you say that you think
Parkinson's disease starts in the gut as
inflammation in the gut.
>> Yeah, that's a great um example of how
my view of these diseases changing.
There's really good epidemiology data
now. Um
>> epidemiology data.
>> Epidemiology data is data in large
populations.
Um so you study the cause of disease by
studying populations. That's essentially
what epidemiology is. And what these
studies have shown is that if you follow
susceptible people
uh and find out who at the end ended up
with Parkinson's disease, you will see
that
about 90% of people who end up with
Parkinson disease had some gut problems
10 years before.
And you might say, okay, well, might not
be related, might be two separate
things, but [snorts] they've actually
found the same protein changes in the
brains in people with Parkinson's
disease, this particular protein that
gets misfolded.
It's a bit equivalent to Alzheimer's but
it's it's separate a separate type of
protein alpha sinuclean and it gets
folded and you get this characteristic
thing you can see
postmortem called a a louisi body but
it's the protein folding that's
important and if you look in the gut not
only do these people have constipation
and bloating and problems 10 years
before a really sluggish uh intestine
but they have the same proteins that are
misfolded that you can find in their gut
And they think that it takes 10 years
for these proteins to go slowly up the
vagus nerve into the brain and then it
causes the problem there. So this is the
the latest theory behind Parkinson's
disease that it actually starts in the
gut and it's related to inflammation in
the gut. So these proteins start folding
when the gut is not happy which means
that you could potentially prevent
Parkinson's disease by a gut friendly
diet. It looks like it's the evidence is
building that you know that's going to
be pretty concrete soon. If that's true
then you may think what other diseases
might have that origin there that we um
really don't understand. What about
multiple scerosis that might happen
there first? And it really starts to
bring,
you know, this obscure of these brain
disease back into the domain of the rest
of the body and what's going on there
and these metabolic problems. You know,
diabetes is the number one risk factor
for so many of these conditions as well.
So like if you got type two diabetes,
you're like four times as more likely to
have a brain disease. not only
depression but also you know bipolar,
schizophrenia,
epilepsy, all of these ones. So clearly
they're linked. They're this what goes
on in your body,
what you're eating,
what what your immune system is doing
has this amazing knock-on effect.
>> So what do we do about it? What does the
average person do about it? You know,
because the average you know what the
average diet looks like in the western
world. Um, if we want to have
optimally healthy brains and avoid
dementia, Parkinson's, and some of these
other disorders that are linked to the
gut, what is what is the most important
thing the listener right now should be
thinking about and doing? Well, I like
to think we got I've got a list that's
getting longer, but it I've got now
eight rules for gut health, which pretty
much work
for all health because we you to treat
the brain. It's no really different to
treating the rest of your body. If you
treat that well, you're going to be
fine. So, the first thing is to be
mindful of what you're eating. Don't
just put any old in your mouth, you
know? I mean, stop for a bit and saying,
"Is this what's in it? Is it any good
for me? How's it going to make me feel?"
>> You mean checking labels and stuff?
>> Checking labels or even just taking a
second to think, you know, gosh,
don't just blindly eat in front of the
TV without thinking what you're eating
as we most of us do. Second, and
probably the key thing is, I think, is
to eat a diversity of plants. 30 plants
a week. These 30 plants give you the
diversity of chemicals to act as
fertilizers for getting as many good
bugs as you can into your system.
>> How can you explain that to someone that
doesn't know much about the gut?
>> When I'm talking about your gut, I'm
talking about gut microbes. And there
are 40 to 100 trillion of these guys in
your mainly in your large intestine that
are
many pharmacies. And
there we have thousands of different
species, all of which highly selected to
eat only certain foods. There's one that
only likes coffee, for example, called
Lorenabacta.
>> A bug that only likes coffee in my
belly. It's
>> just waiting for you to drink coffee.
>> And when I drink coffee, what happens?
It uh has a party, has sex, has babies,
multiplies, and then produces certain
chemicals in response by breaking down
that coffee into other ingredients which
might then help your immune system and
um in some way explain why coffee is
good for your heart. So, you got to
imagine that you've got lots of bugs
like that that are highly specific
waiting for you to have uh not only
coffee, but you know, maybe it's seaweed
or maybe uh it's baobob or maybe it's
things you don't often have uh so that
we can expand our list of good bugs.
>> So, if I stop eating a particular food
like coffee, if I stop having coffee,
will that bug die? It probably goes down
to very low levels because actually
what's interesting is even if you stop
drinking coffee, you're surrounded by
coffee drinkers
and they they're droplets of saliva and
kisses and uh greetings mean that you'll
be getting uh some of that either those
bugs themselves or you'll be getting um
some bits of coffee in the air, a coffee
aroma. Okay. So, the bugs go up and down
in population.
>> Yes. So, even in non- coffee drinkers,
we do see tiny amounts of this uh this
Lorsonacta.
Um but in countries that don't drink
coffee at all, there are a few African
countries for example where it doesn't
ex
um so it that's but I think it's
important to imagine your it's a bit
like having a rare animal. You know,
you've got to feed in your zoo. You
don't want to give them all the same
food. You've got to give them this
diversity so that all the rare animals
can get out there. And we know that the
more good bugs you've got,
the better your immune system, the more
you dampen inflammation, the more you
can prevent all these problems that
we're seeing. So our our aim is to build
up the good bugs. And the more you build
them up, they squash out the bad bugs,
the ones that like eating the burgers
and the the the bad food and the and the
terrible quality fats and the artificial
substances. So you're squashing them out
by starving them and you do that by
feeding them properly. That's the that's
the concept if that makes sense.
>> And on that point of coffee, doesn't it
restrict blood flow to your brain?
>> No, not as far as I know.
>> Oh, really? Um I'm talking I know about
coffee at the epidemiological level. So
there have been multiple studies like I
was saying between coffee drinkers, non-
coffee drinkers, seeing what happens to
them 20 30 years later and drinking
between two and five cups of coffee
reduces your risk of heart disease by
about 25%.
So there may be other studies showing it
does something to your brain, but
generally everything I've seen is
beneficial. I've not seen anything
negative. Although there are some people
who react to caffeine badly, so there's
always a a personalized element to it.
>> Sleep disruption and stuff.
>> Yes. So you you might be a a
metabolizer. It doesn't metabolize
quickly in you. So that caffeine is
hanging around longer. So they're the
only
downsides to it for some people.
>> Can it make you more anxious?
>> Um I think it can make some people more
anxious. Yes. Um, and that's that's why
things like matcha are better than
coffee because they have a an extra
chemical in there that can calm you
down. So, like anything, it any food,
it's all personalized. And so, when we
talk about epidemiology, we're talking
about the average person. Um, doesn't
mean there aren't aren't exceptions. So,
I'm not saying that everybody in the
world needs to have coffee, but coffee
used to be demonized as something that
would give you heart attacks and
arrhythmias. And in fact the opposite is
true epidemologically speak you can
actually you get less heart
abnormalities arrhythmias when you drink
coffee for reasons we still don't
understand.
>> So the first point of the eight was mind
being mindful about what you eat. Second
was uh eat uh 30 different plants. And
that's that was the basis of our our
Zoey product, the daily 30, which has 34
uh mainly freeze-dried whole plants in
it. And we've recently added some more.
So, we added some seaweed, some algae,
and uh some kombucha in there. So,
they're rare ingredients. We got seven
different types of mushroom that you
wouldn't normally have.
>> It's worth me saying that I'm an
investor in Zoe. Um, and let me take
that back.
>> So, you just you take this out and you
sprinkle it on top of your food
typically.
>> Yes. You add it to food. Um, and it's so
it's it's different to most of the other
sort of supplements you might see. Uh,
it's not instead of food. It looks more
like food than most uh of the of the
common supplements out there that look
like green powders. We we did a big
trial of this with about 340 people
comparing it to a probiotic and a um a
dummy one and over 6 weeks you get
really quite dramatic improvements in
your gut uh microbes with with eating
this. So the you really push up the good
bugs and squash out the bad bugs about
several times more than you would get
just by having a traditional probiotic.
So this fertilizer approach
[snorts] uh does seem to work and this
is this is the study where we also
showed the improvements in mood after a
few days which um you know surprised me
because I wasn't even thinking about
that when we we we planned the study. So
the key reported findings in that study
were a gut microbiome improvement,
an average increase of five points in
their Zo gut microbiome score, digestive
system, 70% of people reported
improvements in overall digestive
systems
symptoms. Um,
and it increased fullness by 41.5%.
Satisfaction by 21.6% 6% and energy by
43.3% and reduced hunger and desire to
eat versus
the meal alone.
About half reported increased energy and
45% reported improved happiness in the
main study.
>> So we weren't expecting that. That that
was my my point really on these because
we thought it would just be gut it like
okay do I get do I go to the toilet more
often? Is it improving my gut microbes?
And so it was a real bonus to see these
these brain effects.
>> And did you do stool tests on those
people to see yes the change in the bugs
in their stomach over that period? Was
it six weeks?
>> It was around six weeks. Yes.
>> Yeah. And what did you see change in
their their gut bugs?
>> So we've got a new scoring method for
gut bugs which we published last month
in in in nature. And so we used to talk
about diversity and on previous podcasts
I think we've talked about diversity
which is the number of different species
but we've got a better way of looking at
that now which is to take um 100 most
important bugs that change with diet
that everybody's got because we're all
different. It's very hard to compare
your your bugs with my bugs because we
only share 20%. So this looks at 100
common bugs that we've both got, 50 good
and 50 bad. And what we want in an
intervention is to see the the good bugs
are associated with good diet and good
health outcomes, good blood tests
are going up and the bad bugs associated
with inflammation,
uh, poor diets and bad health outcomes
going down. And that's exactly what we
saw. We saw an a change in roughly 40 of
these microbes with the prebiotic the
daily 30 whereas with the probiotic
which we know works from other studies
we saw only a change in about four or
five of the bugs.
>> Okay.
>> So was it so they both worked but the
the prebiotic was working better than
the probiotic which has sort of changed
my mind about what's more powerful.
>> So prebiotic being what and probiotic
being what? Prebiotic is like a
fertilizer for gut microbes. It's there.
It's giving them food.
>> Yeah.
>> So that and in an indiscriminate way
because we're giving a a wide variety of
foods. In these 34 plants, each of them
has hundreds of chemicals. So there's
thousands of different things for them
to feed on. Whereas a probiotic, we used
Lactobacillus ramnosis, which is a
well-known one that's been studied,
you know, hundred of time in hundreds of
trials. It's a live microbe that lives
generally in in foods like yogurt and
things like this in a concentrated form
in a capsule. You give that and it
improved uh the gut microb but much less
than the
>> so prebiotic gives them food. Probiotic
actually just puts bugs in there.
>> It puts bugs in there and we used to
think it was like a seed.
Uh so the it was the you know so
fertilizers and maybe seeds but we now
know that that bug will never really
seed in your in your gut microbiome.
And so the science is and our thinking
has changed. We think the probiotic is
is really tickling your immune system as
it's going down.
>> Okay.
>> So it's [snorts]
probably working higher up in the the
small intestine which is um further up
in the gut.
Where where is where is the gut?
>> Yes. So most people if you ask people to
point to the gut they always think of
their stomach.
>> Yeah.
>> Uh that's not your stomach. You see
that's that's your there the intestines.
So your your stomach is up here. U take
away your your liver.
If you imagine we've got a body here,
you got a mouth. Food goes in there
through the esophagus, which is a tube
that leads to the stomach. And this is
the stomach here, which is highly
acidic. And that leads into the geodenum
through a a little valve. And that is
where food starts getting mushed around
into little balls. It goes into the
small intestine here, which is badly
named because the small intestine is
really the largest bit of the gut. And
it's endless coils as of u guts there.
Lots of crypts. There's little nooks and
crannies everywhere. And so the surface
area is really huge. It's it's several
tennis courts if you laid it out just
one um in one human. And that's because
that's where most of the nutrients get
absorbed. They get extracted from the
food and absorbed that way. So that all
the trace elements and things we're
recycling. We're like a recycling
factory. And then from the small
intestine, it then goes into the large
intestine, which is also called the
colon. And that's where most of the gut
microbes are. So, so 99% of the gut
microbes are in that final part, the
large intestine, which uh is a a couple
of meters long and varies widely between
people. And this is the spot where fiber
uh goes, things that hasn't been
digested in the early part of the the
gut uh is and that's because the
microbes mainly feed off fiber.
And so that's where they do the good.
They convert that fiber into products
such as short- chain fatty acids, which
are the really beneficial chemicals that
are good for our immune system. And it's
important to realize that across both
the small and the large intestine,
you've got ner huge amounts of nerves.
You've got what's called the interic
nervous system, which is our second
brain and is it was actually the first
brain to be formed. So when we were
little embryos
uh we started as a little tube and the
nervous system that formed around our
intestine was actually the first bit
first brain of our body and in a way we
developed the second one on our head as
a oh bit of an afterthought. Uh which is
quite fun way of thinking about it but
just shows how important the nerves are
in our in our gut to our the way we
function. And as we were talking earlier
about this this connection between the
two and there's also immune cells. So
70% of our immune cells are uh in the
gut. Most of them in in the large
intestine but also in the small
intestine. So our immune system is here
and a huge amount of our nervous system
is here.
>> Why? Presumably the the bugs are all
through the body.
>> They're everywhere. So they're also in
your Yes. So I should point out we're
covered in bugs. So every bit of the
human body uh has uh some bugs in it.
The second biggest place where we have
them is in our mouth. So the oral
microbiome in our in our saliva and in
our teeth and uh our gums. And that's
why poor [snorts]
uh hygiene if you're not flossing
properly, you double the risk of getting
dementia as well. Interestingly, because
there's a a real link between microbes
here that if they're eating plaque and
other stuff that you're leaving around
in your gums gets inflamed,
that creates an environment where nasty
microbes that love inflammation live.
And for reasons we don't know, they seem
to pass into from from your mouth into
your brain and trigger inflammation in
the brain, which then uh increase your
risk of dementia. if you're not
flossing.
>> Yes, this is really new science showing
that just how important these getting
the right bugs in the right place and
avoiding the ones who are in the wrong
place really is.
>> Why do we need these bugs? Why didn't
evolution design us so that we could
just do all this stuff without the need
of these little workers, these little
bugs in our bodies? It it seems super
weird to me that you know you think of
the human body as being this one
organism but actually it's appears to be
many millions and millions and millions
of organisms.
>> Well, you've got a sort of humanentric
view of the world. So um we we evolve
from microbes.
>> We are one. We we used to be one.
>> We used to be one and um it it turns out
that most of our body is [snorts] are
remnants of microbes. microbes obviously
fused to cause to cause uh human cells.
So that was the whole origin of of how
multisellular creatures came together.
These single-sellled microbes,
some of them fused to to do that, others
stayed as single cells. There was always
this link between the single-sellled
guys and their multisellular
ancestors, if you like. And so as we
co-evolved into more complicated beings,
the the two were always together. And it
turned out that again as like as we're
formed as embryos, the gut is the first
thing that you know this this cylind
this tube is the first thing that comes
out um of the design system. And it's
designed to have microbes in it that
serve a crucial purpose in training our
immune system to recognize what's out
what's harmful and what's beneficial.
And it's also shown to be crucial for
our brain development. But it it is
fascinating when we start think about
our origins and think of it that you
know we essentially start as microbes
because also we don't think of our body
you know we've always historically
thought of you know God's creation this
body had nothing to do with anything
else we were the masters of the universe
and I think it's quite humbling to
realize that so much of us comes from
microbes and I learned something
recently that was that also blew me away
is that all ourselves have these
powerhouses in them called mitochondria.
And it turns out they do much more than
just supply batteries for the cell. They
they fighting inflammation. They're
important for gene expression. They're
good for metabolism. And it turns out
the origin of these things is little
microbes that got trapped in our bodies.
They are essentially uh microbes that
were good at making creating energy.
And um at some point in our distant
past, we fused um our multisellular
um microbes that were were going around
doing stuff. They said, "Oh, we could do
with some more energy." And so by chance
they fused with these energy microbes
and slowly and slowly became
incorporated into our bodies so that we
now have these mitochondria all of our
bodies which whose ancestors are also uh
microbes
>> and we have them in every cell of our
body.
>> Yes, we do. And they're turning out to
be quite crucial as well in in brain
health. Do you do you do you spend much
time wondering or have there been
periods in your life where you've
wondered about the meaning of all of
this and why there's living organisms?
Because it doesn't appear to be a great
need for living organisms.
You know, you could just have rocks and
water on these planets. I don't know why
you need humans necessarily in as it
relates to the contribution we make to
the um the environment. Well, I think as
soon as you had life, whether it was
plant life, I mean, you're you're
thinking perhaps of animal life, but you
know, things like lyken on rocks were
one of the first forms of life
and something that was needed to
get, you know, energy, nutrients from
the rock and then they for some reason
just wanted to survive, you know, and I
think that's the the point that life is
about
getting enough nutrients so you can uh
keep living or pass you know your genes
on to someone else. It's this uh that
concept once that was started maybe it
was lyken everything else came from that
and that could have just been a chance
event.
So I but I you know it is always
humbling humbling to think that you know
we've probably come back from some lowly
point like this uh as we emerge from
emerge from rocks and and water but um
uh yeah I philosophy is not my strong
suit but I I just get so much pleasure
from finding new facts uh that are all
around us and I think it's fascinating
that we've spent so long as humans
looking up at the stars
whereas looking inside us at things like
microbes and their origin is to me far
more exciting
>> and maybe explanatory
>> as to like you know we're looking at the
stars in France.
>> Yeah, we look at the stars oh where do
we come from? You know where what about
the big bang all this kind of stuff
whereas actually studying what's in
ourselves and where do they come from we
could learn a hell of a lot more about
ourselves. If you follow me, you've
probably heard me talk about hiring more
so than anything else. You've probably
seen me on Behind the Diary, which is
our other YouTube channel, talking about
how obsessed I am with the hiring
process. And this really brings me to a
recommendation I'd love to give you,
which is to check out our sponsor,
LinkedIn, if you're having hiring
difficulties. Their new AI assistant
filters out applications for you based
on the criteria you've set for that
specific job, surfacing only the best
matches. That way, you're not left
having to hunt through a mountain of
different rums. It'll recommend 25
candidates daily who fit what you're
looking for that you can then invite to
apply for the role. LinkedIn is where we
go to find the long-term A players that
I have in my team. In fact, employees
hired through LinkedIn are 30% more
likely to stick around for at least a
year compared to those hired through
other job networks. Hire right the first
time by posting your job for free at
linkedin.com/doac.
Then use the promotion feature to access
LinkedIn jobs new AI assistant. That's
linkedin.com/doac.
Terms and conditions apply. All I had to
do was brain dump. Imagine if you had
someone with you at all times that could
take the ideas you have in your head,
synthesize them with AI to make them
sound better and more grammatically
correct and write them down for you.
This is exactly what Whisper Flow is in
my life. It is this thought partner that
helps me explain what I want to say. And
it now means that on the go, when I'm
alone in my office, when I'm out and
about, I can respond to emails and Slack
messages and WhatsApps and everything
across all of my devices just by
speaking. I love this tool. And I
started talking about this on my
behindthescenes channel a couple of
months back. And then the founder
reached out to me and said, "We're
seeing a lot of people come to our tool
because of you." So, we'd love to be a
sponsor. We'd love you to be an investor
in the company. And so, I signed up for
both of those offers. And I'm now an
investor and a huge partner in a company
called Whisper Flow. You have to check
it out. Whisper Flow is four times
faster than typing. So if you want to
give it a try, head over to
whisperflow.ai/doac
to get started for free. And you can
find that link to whisper flow in the
description below. So that was the
second point of the eight, which is eat
30 plants.
And uh so daily 30 is a is a easy way to
do that and a tasty way to do that.
What's the third one? I'd go for eat eat
fermented foods and try and get three
portions of fermentss in your diet
>> every day.
>> Every day.
>> And I wouldn't have said this three
years ago because the science wasn't
really strong enough to support
this, but a study three years ago by a
group in Stanford of 28 people showed
the giving. They gave them five portions
a day for about a month and showed that
you can get a reduction in blood
inflammation levels about 25%
in that time compared to a fiber diet.
And that,
you know, blew me away because this this
was the first really good study in this
because there have been lots of studies
but they're not good quality. Suddenly
someone doing daily bloods, you know,
they would looked at 20 odd proteins in
the blood and suddenly you've got this
link between a a food
and directly affecting inflammation in
the blood, which as we've been talking
about has big knock-on effects on the
brain and the rest of the body.
>> That's like kimchi and stuff like that.
Fermented food is any food that's been
transformed by microbes into something
better, which means it it tastes better.
It's more complex. It lasts longer, so
you don't need a fridge. That's why our
ancestors did it. And it it's been
chemically transformed and is generally
more nutritious.
>> Give me some examples.
>> So, um, yogurt from milk. All you're
doing is adding
>> uh
>> zero fat. Zero fat Greek yogurt.
>> Oh, I'd never have zero fat Greek
yogurt. Why do you want to drink that?
>> I don't know. I just I was just
>> No. Uh no,
>> that that means it be Yeah. heavily
processed. You don't want that. But
there's still good microbes in it. And
um you know, all you're doing is
transforming something rather average
like milk, which adults don't really
need. It's not particularly beneficial
milk. And just by adding the microbes to
it, you make it something healthy for
the for the body. And that's now been
shown by uh by these these kind of
studies.
>> Which what do you mean by what's what's
wrong with this zero fat Greek yogurt?
It says zero fat. So that's sounds like
it's
>> there's nothing. Well, we we need fats
to live. So fat is good. And in fact,
the just a few days ago, the USDA have
changed their all their guidelines,
which used to be about saying don't have
fat and and have lowfat products to
saying actually fat is good. All that
advice we said in the past is wrong.
>> So why do they label things zero zero
fat still?
>> Because public still believe they're
healthy and the companies that make them
save money by calling it by having zero
fat. they replace the fat with starchy
artificially made um fillers basically.
So it's usually more sugary uh by having
zero fat in it. But if it says zero fat,
it's a sign it's unhealthy. You should
avoid it.
>> So what are those fermented foods then?
You were going to say you said
>> well I should I just give you a quick
list of all them so people know what I'm
talking about. So we've got yogurt,
>> we've got cheese, and virtually every
cheese has live microbes except American
cheeses. The more artisan the bigger the
number. Uh milk keir which is like a
super yogurt often has 10 to 20 types of
micro in it. The krauts. So I think of
the 4ks. So we got we've done keier. The
kraut is like a sauerkraut. So we got
fermented cabbage. Cabbage is pretty
boring on its own. You ferment it. The
tastes are amazing and it has these
health benefits. Then [snorts] you've
got kimchi, which is a a spicy uh kraut
and the staple diet of Korea. And
they're pretty healthy. And even though
it's got salt in it, people who have
kimchi have lower blood pressure than
people that don't have kimchi, and I
love kimchi. Now, I hated it at first,
but I'm now a real addict. Then you've
got kombuchas. Um you see those in in
most supermarkets and stores. Uh that's
fermented tea and the good ones can have
30 or 40 of these. There's other another
type water kefir which isn't as popular
but I think we're going to see more of
it. Tibikos is the other name for it.
It's grains with lots of microbes in it.
A bit like milk keir but with fruit
added. And then you got miso all the
misos you get in Japan. miso soup, uh,
miso paste, tempes, all the all these,
uh, fermentss around the world. There's
hundreds of different fermentss in
nearly every continent has their own
type of ferment. In Africa, there's all
kinds of fermented beers and porrides.
And of course, we got the these are the
live ones, but they've also got lots of
dead ferments. Obviously, bread is a
dead ferment. Everybody makes sourdough.
Then you've got wines and beers.
And interestingly,
um, again, very new science, dead
fermentss actually have some health
benefits. So, I used to be very
dismissive of
uh products like kombuchas that you
would see in in stores in America that
say lightly pasteurized. And I'd say,
well, that's a load of rubbish. Be
nothing good about that. But it turns
out that even dead microbes when you do
a randomized trial have some benefit for
the host.
>> You're looking a bit skeptical. But I
these against placebo uh studies and
enough of them now that you uh
definitely believe I know some of the
researchers that they they were
surprised but it's it's genuine.
>> Why is that? What's going on? We think
again if you go back to the vaccine um
discussion we we were having it looks
like although it's not alive the micro
still has a cell wall and it has
proteins in the cell wall. So it's like
the debris of these dead bodies that
you're ingesting. We think they're
tickling your immune cells as they go
through the uh small intestine.
>> Okay. And it it's it's giving a signal
to your immune system to calm down,
reduce inflammation.
That's our best understanding of what
this phenomenon is about. So
live microbes are best, but it looks
like dead microbes, which are called
postbiotics or zombie biotics, are
probably also good for you. So, I think
all fermented foods, even those that,
you know, I I would have dismissed 3
years ago, are probably good for us. And
that's really the best way to reduce
your inflammation levels. We did a big
study in Zoey of we asked 9,000 people
who are Zoey members who weren't taking
fermentss to try and see how they get on
taking three fermentss a day. How do
they feel?
I think about 3,000 dropped out. Didn't
didn't fancy it, but nearly 6,000
continued and did the the two weeks
taking it after a oneweek run-in period.
And around half of them noticed
improvements in mood, energy, and had
less hunger.
So, anyone out there who hasn't tried
this, I think it's a great simple way to
u see what you can improve just by
changing what you're eating and and
going for some of these fermentss that
you might not have thought about.
>> What's number four?
>> Number four is pivot your protein. At
the moment, proteins
all in the news. Everyone wants to have
more protein. Big controversy about
whether you need more. Uh most studies
showed 90% of us are getting enough
protein. Probably doesn't do too much
harm other than it's really hard to get
lots of protein in your diet. And most
people are focusing on eggs and meat
when they think about protein. So what I
think people should focus on is there
many other sources of good quality
protein like beans, like legumes, like
mushrooms,
uh like whole grains, like quinoa and
pole barley instead of rice. That if
you're thinking about it, you can get
your protein and get your fiber because
90% of us are deficient in fiber. And if
you want to look after your gut
microbes, you really need to uh be
giving them the fiber. Otherwise, you're
starving them just by having a a protein
drink. Next one. Which one are we on?
>> Number five.
>> Number five is think quality, not
calories.
The whole idea of assessing food by
calories is wrong. We've discussed this
in the past. You should never really go
for low calorie products. you should go
for ones that are whole foods that are
have their initial structure in them
that uh have all those original
nutrients. So, it's all focusing really
on high quality foods that haven't been
tampered with. And
>> why why not calories?
>> Because it's not a good way to assess
food. Uh calorie restricted diets have
been shown for the vast majority of
people not to work. And we know
particularly through GLP-1 drugs that as
you restrict your your diet and
calories, your hunger signals go up. And
hunger is the main driver of obesity.
So all you're doing is losing some
weight shortterm. Longterm it will
bounce back as your as your body does
that. So um calories should be ignored
on any labels really. You should be
looking to get high quality food that
supports your gut. And that's an
important change in mindset for many
people. But the next point is is is the
crucial one which links to that which is
avoiding high-risisk processed foods
because they
damage your your gut and your body in in
a number of ways. The first obvious one
is that they have lots of additives and
chemicals to transform them into
something edible.
And those ones
um things like emulsifiers,
preservatives,
uh gums, uh colorants, flavorings,
artificial sweeteners are all things
made by the food companies to trick your
body into thinking these are tasty. and
they often are, but they will damage
your gut microbes who in their billions
of years of evolution have never come
across these products because they don't
exist in nature in that form.
>> So like the cereal bar I have here.
>> Yes. So, this has got um flavored
fillings, whatever that means, glucose
syrup, glycerin, uh wheat, fruit juice
concentrate,
vegetable fiber, natural flavorings,
oatmeal, and soya. Well, this one
doesn't look too bad. Whatever. I'm not
quite sure how flavored filling is,
though. Flavored filling anything.
>> Was that corn flakes or something?
>> Corn flakes. Yes. So they would be uh
something I would regard as uh highly
processed and uh probably a moderate
risk. At Zoey we've created a new scale
because in the past we'd have grouped
all of these together as the same but I
think we now need to think of these as
zero mild moderate high risk depending
on whether they have them.
>> What about this?
>> That that would be high risk. Okay.
because this is designed by uh the
people that make them. It's got
preservatives in it that so this will be
the same in a week's time, right? We can
still be playing with it. It's not going
to change or get moldy. Um it's got uh
emulsifiers to keep it together. It's
got extra sugar in it. It'll have a
really amount of salt in there probably
and and sugar and got some fat in here.
Um, so it'll be hyper palatable. And
>> what does that mean?
>> That means that you can eat a lot of it
before you get full. So it makes you
overeat.
>> For anyone that can't see, we're talking
about white bread. Just normal white
bread that you'd probably get in the
supermarket.
>> Yeah. And it's it's got a special
structure that's different. That also
means that it it it takes very little
chewing. All right. So you put this in
your mouth, you don't really have to
chew it. It's like baby food. Whereas,
you know, a real bread made with high
fiber, you you know, it takes several
chews to get it down you. So, there's
lots of features of these foods that um
alert you to them being uh unhealthy.
So, not only ingredients which are bad
for your gut microbes and disrupt them,
the additives. U you've got the fact
that it makes you overeat. So, a lot of
those potato snacks and things you get,
they just dissolve in your mouth.
They're designed so you can eat them so
fast.
>> Is there a good bread or a preferable
bread?
>> Yeah, there are. There's not many things
like rye breads and spelt breads,
ideally sourdoughs,
um the German style breads that, you
know, the Scandinavian breads, they're
[snorts] pretty good for you because
they still have the whole grain intact
and that means it's got the nutrients.
also means it's harder to eat them
quickly and they fill you up. These if
you eat this bread, it just doesn't
makes you hungrier. I used to have this
all the time when I was a a junior
doctor. [snorts] Every ward had toasters
and uh cheap bread courtesy of the NHS
and you you eat them, they give you a
little kick, but you just feel just as
hungry an hour later having eaten, you
know, four of them. And I think this is
the problem. Many people don't realize
that this food is is not only making
them sick, making their gut microbes
sick, but it it's actually making them
overeat. And studies show it makes you
overeat by about 25%, which you know
really adds up every day of your life. A
lot of people, including me, have gone
through their life thinking that because
when they eat this stuff, they get
stomach pains and sometimes they have
gas or they'll have like, I don't know,
toilet related issues. um that they are
gluten free, like they are gluten
intolerant or whatever.
>> I was one of those people. I thought
because if I eat this, if I was to eat
this piece of bread, I'd feel it for the
next two days.
>> So, I assumed I was gluten-free. But
when I think we spoke last time, you
told me that almost nobody is is gluten
intolerant to has a gluten what's the
term?
>> Well, there's Yes.
>> Gluten intolerance.
>> Gluten intolerant.
>> Yeah. But that that's not
>> when you test them. Yes. Directly. I
mean there are some u but most people
who think they are are not [snorts] and
that's because generally when you eat a
sandwich in the US or the UK uh you're
getting crap bread terrible filling uh
all kinds of other additives and
chemicals which are probably disagreeing
with you. So when you give up eating
sandwiches you might feel better. So
roughly up to 30% of people believe
gluten is a problem for them but only 1%
actually need to strictly avoid it.
>> I think it's a great example of
we love to have a simple solution. So
gluten came in said right everyone can
think about gluten. Let's just get rid
of that and all our problems are solved.
rather than thinking what are all the
other things in a in a cheap bread
sandwich that you might be reacting to.
It also could be the emulsifier that is
uh gluing that bread together or is in
the mayonnaise that you're having. Uh it
could be some of these colorants that
are, you know, making the bread white or
ch making that sauce bright yellow that
you might be intolerant of. The more
things that they these manufacturers add
to these foods, the more likely there is
one that is disagreeing you with you and
your favorite sandwich suddenly, you
know, becomes your worst enemy because,
you know, they're just created by
brilliant scientists to all they care
about is you find it irresistible and
keep eating it. If you eat the healthy
stuff, you don't have these problems.
>> What about these these almonds?
>> Um, some walnuts in there as well. What
do you think of almonds? I love almonds.
Um they're they're good for you and lots
of studies showing they're good for your
cognition, even some mild effects on
other aspects of brain health and uh and
and mood. These are uh good for gut
health. They've got all kinds of really
good fats in them. These omega-3s and
etc. are are in nuts. So, they're a
fantastic snack that um do fill you up
and generally recommend them. Probably
more data about walnuts than almonds for
brain health that that I've read about.
So, there are, you know, studies of
people take a lot of walnuts, they help,
but I I think the idea shouldn't be
there's only one type of nut that you
should eat that's going to help your
brain. We should again go back to this
concept of diversity. And so mix nuts
really are your best way of um helping
your your brain health by eating these
things. And we used to demonize nuts
because they had fat in it. Certainly
when I was uh you know 20 years ago, oh
you can't have peanuts and nuts. They're
really bad for your heart. Now we've
totally reversed this. And I just think
it it just shows
how much has changed in this field in in
a in a relatively short time.
>> What's number seven? So that number six
was avoid high-risk processed foods.
>> Important when you're picking food to
try and get as many colors on your plate
as possible because that's a sign that
they contain these chemicals called
polyphenols.
>> Natural colors.
>> Yes. Yeah. Exactly. Not the uh the blue
colors you get that we really want to
avoid which are bad for you. So natural
colors are a sign that they these foods
are good for you. So, we're talking
bright berries, we're talking
raspberries, blackberries, uh,
strawberries, we're talking um, rosolo
lettuce, we're talking about uh,
cabbages that are purple. Uh, we're
talking really all those bright colors
because they contain chemicals that are
from this family broadly called the
polyphenols which act as
fuel for your gut microbes. and that
allows them to then in turn uh produce
things like short- chain fatty acids and
and keeps them healthy. So, it's a sign
from nature that we're eating these
these foods and it's a signal probably
your ancestors knew. And the other sign
which we can't tell from looking at it,
but you we get to know is bitterness.
So, bitter uh plants tend to be much
healthier than uh bland ones. That's the
broccoli story. That's um why extra
virgin olive oil is so good for us. Why
uh coffee is also good. Why uh red wine
and and uh dark chocolate. It's those
polyphenols in there that are really
giving us our microbes a boost.
>> And the eighth one, last but not least,
>> last but not least, give your gut a
rest.
>> Fast.
>> Yes. So timerestricted eating,
this has been shown to help your uh gut
recover in a proper circadian rhythm.
It's a bit like getting a good night's
sleep for your gut. So we can we all
know the benefits of sleep for us, but
we often disregard our gut. Many people
have a late night snack, uh a kebab
going home from the pub or whatever it
is. It's completely the wrong thing to
do for your gut health. 12 to 14 hour uh
overnight fast trying to restrict your
eating time to 10 hours really has been
shown to have metabolic advantages for
you uh and improves your gut lining. So
it it's less likely to to leak and cause
inflammation and allows the cleaning
team and your microbes to come out and
and clean up your gut. the number of
studies now um showing that it it does
have these metabolic advantages, but I'm
not pushing it so hard these days
because we did do a mass another massive
uh citizen science study with Zoe with
over 100,000 people doing this. Um we
asked them to do 14-hour timerestricted
eating. A third
gave up. They said, "I can't do this. I
feel hung too hungry all the time. I
need to be snacking something like
almonds.
A third loved it and they're still doing
it two years later. And a third was sort
of, yeah, I'll do this sometimes. I feel
better on it. So, I think there's a
personalized element to it. But, uh, if
you can do it, it is really important.
And I would urge even the people that
find it tough, if you can avoid that
unhealthy late night snack, that can
have a really big impact on your gut and
your brain. You know, every once in a
while you come across a product that has
such a huge impact on your life that
you'd probably describe it as a
gamecher. And I would say for about 35
to 40% of my team, they would currently
describe this product that I have in
front of me called Ketone IQ, which you
can get at ketone.com,
as a game changer. But the reason I
became a coowner of this company and the
reason why they they now are a sponsor
of this podcast is because one day when
I came to work there was a box of this
stuff sat on my desk. I had no idea what
it was. Lily in my team says that this
company have been in touch. So I went
upstairs, tried it and quite frankly the
rest is history in terms of my focus, my
energy levels, how I feel, how I work,
how productive I am. Game changer. So if
you want to give it a try, visit
ketone.com/stephven
for 30% off. You'll also get a free gift
with your second shipment. And now you
can find Keton IQ at Target stores
across the United States where your
first shot is completely free of charge.
If there's anything we need, it is
connection. Especially in the world
we're living in today. And that is
exactly why we created these
conversation cards because on this show
when I sit here with my guests and have
those deep intimate conversations, this
remarkable thing happens time and time
again. We feel deeply connected to each
other. At the end of every episode, the
guest I'm interviewing leaves a question
for the next guest, and we've turned
them into these conversation cards. And
we've added these twist cards to make
your conversations even more
interesting. And there are so many more
twists along the way with the
conversation cards. This is the brand
new edition. And for the first time
ever, I've added to the pack this gold
card, which is an exclusive question
from me. But I'm only putting the gold
cards in the first run of conversation
cards. So, get yours now before the
limited edition gold cards are all gone.
Head to the link in the description
below.
>> You've become more open to keto in
recent years.
>> Yes. [sighs]
Um, and
>> I'm ke I would say I'm keto curious.
>> You're keto curious. What's made you
keto curious? cuz I don't think you I
don't think you were very um keen on
keto before for
>> No, I think when we discussed it, I was
I was pretty anti it, you know, but
reading about the brain, how important
metabolism of the brain, brain energy is
and doing more research has slightly
changed my mind because what we
discovered is how amazing it is for
childhood epilepsy.
>> Mhm. It it is still used as the main
treatment for uh drugresistant childhood
epilepsy.
>> The keto diet.
>> The keto diet. So what for people who
don't know what what we're talking about
here is you're changing the the energy
supply of the brain from glucose to
ketone bodies, which is a switch that
we've always had ever in evolutionary
terms when we couldn't get food. So
after about 2 days of not having food,
we've used up our glucose reserves. We
used it up from our our muscles and you
switch to this other form uh of energy.
And it's a survival mechanism, but what
it tends to do is reset the brain. And
so in epilepsy, that's what they think.
It's a bit of a like rebooting your
computer. Epilepsy is rather strange
because and it used to be thought of as
a mental illness as as I said because
you can get hallucinations, delusions
um it's associated with depression all
all the same you can have all the same
symptoms you get in all mental illnesses
interestingly
and it can be cured by the by keto. So
that made me curious as to what else is
going on. So in theory, some of the
other mental health issues could be
improved by keto. At the moment, there
isn't sufficient good evidence. There's
lots of anecdotal stories,
studies of seven patients, open label,
not convincing enough for me to say
let's do it. But I think definitely
worth doing some real studies. but also
suggesting that even if you don't go as
far as keto, just by improving the
metabolism
and what how the brain is getting its
energy could be really important.
>> I think um the interesting thing about
the ketogenic diet um as someone that
kind of cycles in and out of it, I
actually I showed you earlier I have
this ketone
>> monitor on my arm which is monitoring my
uh ketone levels at all times and
connected to my phone. Um, I think the
interesting thing is in in the world we
live in where [clears throat] there's a
lot of food noise as they call it.
Everywhere you go, there's temptation to
eat something bad. You're going down the
high street, there's takeaways and junk
food stores and stuff like that. What I
think keto does, which you're probably
never going to see in a study, I don't
know if you would, is
it helps the craving. It like dampens
the food noise. So, this is part of why
I think cycling in and out of it is
quite useful for me because it means I
have several moments in the year where
my cravings for like this junk food,
some of which we have on this table,
just appear to vanish for a while, even
if it's just for a week or two weeks or
3 weeks or four weeks. And that allows
me to kind of reset and kind of take
back control of the steering wheel.
Whereas it's very easy, especially in
modern life when you're working really
hard or you're traveling, you've got
sleep disruption to get into that exact
spiral we talked about where you get
like cravings for sugar and then you eat
sugar so you feel a bit more tired and
you lay down a bit more and then you're
not you miss the gym and then you kind
of you have the same like downward
spiral. Um keto continually snaps me out
of the probabil the chance of that.
>> How long for though? H probably the
longest I've done it is maybe six weeks
or eight weeks. But even get even doing
it for
let's say one week for me will then mean
the preceding
four 8 weeks are much healthier in every
regard. So even when I come off it, I'm
much healthier when I you know what I'm
saying?
>> That's why what's interested me because
I think being on a long-term keto diet
is never going to work, right? is just
too brutal and it's incompatible with
keeping your gut happy.
>> Mhm.
>> So to me that's I mean very few people
can tolerate it anyway as you know it's
tough.
>> Yeah. If we can come up with a regime
that every three or every six months,
you had a few days of going into keto,
just enough to reset your body and your
brain, and at the same time, you
protected your gut, say by, you know,
taking daily 30 or other things that
weren't going to get you out of keto,
but could keep your your gut in a in a
in the right place, then I think we
could potentially be have a uh something
of practical use for brain health
issues.
And I' I'd love to, you know, do more of
that. I'm I'm planning at some point
later in this year to do to test myself
to see if I can uh do a week of keto
whilst keeping my gut microbes happy.
>> Have you ever done keto?
>> Uh not properly. No. You know, if you've
done a 24-hour fast, you for a
colonoscopy, you are just about getting
into keto at the time you're doing it,
but you're not you've got other things
to worry about going to the toilet to
distract you. I think this is really it
because we talked about how holistic
that the whole picture of the body is
and how it's so interconnected and how
the brain is so connected to the gut and
all these things and
there's something about doing the
ketogenic diet which just it feels like
I get control back
>> in a in a way that then has this bigger
holistic effect on my life my ability
everything in my life like my ability to
articulate myself as a podcaster I heard
actually Joe Rogan say the same thing he
had him say that words to the effect of
the fact that when he's in ketosis, it's
so profound his ability to articulate
himself and think as someone that does
4hour podcasts that he would almost stay
in it forever just for that particular
cognitive benefit of like mental
clarity. And I always say to my team
that when I'm in the keto diet, I feel
like I'm looking at the world like this,
like everything's high definition and my
mouth and brain are like I always say my
mouth and brain are connected suddenly.
>> Yeah. I've had other people say this
that they do get this sort of clarity
which which could be you know more
exaggerated way of feeling that benefit
of a long overnight fast um when you
come in after 14 hours without eating
and you're doing a podcast like this.
Yeah, I definitely do feel better than
if I'd had a big English breakfast
>> just before. But I think the danger is
that, you know, if people disregard
their gut microbiome and do this, the
the any advantage be wiped out so
quickly by the the problems of what's
happening to your immune cells and
everything else in your body. So if we
can find this intermittent middle way
while you can still look after your gut,
then I agree that would be cool. But I
couldn't find any good data on on this
apart from anecdotes of you know
fanatics who will obviously um say
[snorts] it's great for their patients
but without any control group because
must be a big placebo effect as well. Um
it's very you very hard to not have a
placebo effect when you're doing that
when you're when you're struggling so
hard to do things that as they say you
know people get keto headaches and they
get all you know as you go into it
people say it's can be quite rough so
you can't double blind yourself but I
think it is fascinating that in the same
way that reversing type 2 diabetes you
know improves your mental health it
makes sense that if you're switching
energy levels in the brain you could
also do things. And let's not forget
things like ECT still an effective
treatment. That's that's a brain reset.
Sometimes, you know, we may end up going
back to the the old era of um psychiatry
where, you know, before we got into this
obsession with neurochemicals
to have this holistic view, which I
think is is really fascinating. And when
you did that brain scan, you found that
you're in the highest 20% for levels of
environmental microplastics
>> in your blood.
>> Yeah, that was a bit scary. They divide
the microplastics into into two groups.
The sort of depending the dimensions of
them. I was concerned, am I eat was I
eating a lot of microplastics? So it
turned out that the higher levels I had
were actually the the smaller ones that
you get through your lungs
which probably means a life having lived
a life in London
um you know six decades in London
probably wasn't very good for getting
all this dust and and and uh things in
there. That was a bit of a worry. That's
probably because I cycle around London a
lot in the last 30 years.
>> Have you changed anything in that
regard?
>> I still cycle. I don't like wearing a
mask. I know I sort of probably should.
And I've put a new water filter in my
home uh to
take out some of these chemicals and and
at least some of those plastics. I'm
still not totally convinced
on how bad they are. And the science, I
don't think really we've resolved that
issue yet. But it's it's something I'm
I'm looking at closely. And I think if
there's something easy you can do, I try
and avoid plastic containers. I try and
avoid plastic bottles and I think that's
good for the planet as well.
>> Is there a way to take these
microplastics out of our body once
they're in there?
>> They anecdotally they say things like
plasma feresis um you know you can go
into a spa in LA and and get your uh
plasma taken out and filtered and put
back into your body. This is from your
blood. But uh I don't think there's any
real clinical trials that satisfy me
that would be worth and they cost I
think they're sort of $10,000 ago. So
it's not not a cheap process to have
that done. So wait and see but at the
moment yeah it's it's it's a worry but I
I think there are other things in the
environment probably worse. you know,
dust, pesticides.
Is it better to have organic food rather
than worry about plastics? Um, we don't
know the answer to these these problems.
How is your views on GLP1s like a Zmpeek
and WGO or whatever it's called, these
these um
injections and I think now tablets
people are taking for weight loss. How
is your views on those evolved? Are they
good, bad, and different?
>> They're going to be a part of our life
anyway. So they're going to transform
medicine and uh obesity in a way we
can't imagine at the moment especially
now this year that the pills are
available and it's coming off patent in
many countries so it'd be much cheaper.
I
think for people who really need them
they're an incredible drug. The only
problem is you can't really come off
them. So they're pretty much for life.
My first worry is that a lot of people
take them without supervision
and
they are not told to change their diet.
I'd love people to go take the drugs,
their hunger signal gets switched off.
They can then be mindful about their
food. They could do something like, you
know, have the Zoey app or some other
educational program to change their food
habits forever
in that in that window of opportunity.
And that I think is where we should be
doing. And that's been completely
ignored at the moment. Virtually
nobody's getting that lifestyle advice
as well as the drug. And so they're
failing. They're going back in it. you
know, yo-yoing and they're getting the
worst of the worlds. The other the other
slight worry we need to keep an eye on
is the
long-term effects on the brain. So far,
the data suggests that it does reduce
your chances of getting dementia even
beyond,
you know, reversing diabetes.
So, it looks like it's brain protective
probably because it might have
anti-inflammatory effects.
It reduces things like gambling and uh
addictions.
So we don't really know how it does
that. But if it takes away some of your
drives, those basic drives to say I like
to take risks, you know, I I like to
take drugs. I like to smoke. I like to
gamble on horses.
Is it in some way changing you as a a
person long term in that you might be
less good as an entrepreneur for
example?
>> Mhm.
>> So that is something I think that's
really interesting to follow. But in
general, I think from a public health
perspective,
this could save uh you know, health
systems hundreds of billions long term
and we ought to be taking it much more
seriously and integrating it into
holistic and educational advice.
>> And as it relates to brain health, you
also have a sauna routine as part of
your brain health regime. Yeah, I've
been impressed by some of the science uh
coming out of this and the fact that I
quite enjoy just actually enjoy it from
a hedonistic uh point of view. So I try
and have a sauna twice a week if I can
if I can do that ideally with a cold
plunge afterwards, but the science isn't
sure whether that makes a big
difference. It's like just a workout for
your your blood vessels in your body and
your brain. So um I think that the
science is quite compelling and yeah it
makes me feel good which um is always
should be part of anyone's health
routine. Something you enjoy doing is
always easy
>> and regular socializing is part of your
brain routine.
>> Yeah. If you look at the happiest
longived populations on the planet,
they've all got really good social
lives. They are always dining with
friends, going out. often that does
involve a little bit of alcohol in most
of these societies, but that doesn't
seem to adversely affect them. The idea
of having a a a key group of core
friends you see regularly, I think, is
really good for your mental and brain
health, and loneliness has got to be one
of the the worst things uh for your
brain health. So, really important to
maintain your uh your good friends. What
is uh what is the most important thing
as it relates to brain health or overall
health that we haven't talked about that
we should have talked about?
>> I think we haven't talked about early
life experiences and stress but trauma.
>> Yeah. So one thing um and we haven't
talked about talk therapies and um you
know conventional treatments. So if you
look at all all these brain diseases,
virtually all of them, if you go back in
time,
if you've had uh emotional, physical,
sexual trauma in in early life, you're
much more likely to have brain diseases
later in life.
And this is across all of them. Again,
coming up with the idea that they're all
related in some way. And so, you know,
we've moved on from the Freudian idea
that, you know, the mind is different
and from the brain. If you take this
holistic idea, how does this fit into
this inflammatory
metabolic
um theory of brain health? I think it it
now does because they've done studies
showing that uh following trauma or
stress,
you can trigger your immune system to be
permanently raised.
So again, you get this uh consistent uh
stress that the thermostat doesn't go
down to baseline.
So you have a period of a year, a
terrible period as a kid. They do tests
later in life. You'll they'll find your
inflammation levels in your blood are
raised from people who had a nice gentle
quiet childhood.
And I think this is
starts to link all these different
components together. And these cross all
these early life traumas. You see the
same thing in people with chronic pain,
um chronic back pain, fibromyalgia,
um irritable bowel syndrome,
epilepsy, schizophrenia, it it
everything. But it doesn't really matter
where the source of the stress was. It's
caused some physiological problem. So I
think that that is really interesting so
that we could pick up people who if we
had better tests of that stress and
inflammation we could start to help
those people earlier on before the brain
started to uh struggle and I think that
that's really interesting and of course
we want to do most to reduce the problem
in the first place. They've also done
studies on talk therapies. So obviously
psychiatry is compartmentalized into the
talk therapists and the and the drug
therapists
and
there's quite a lot of evidence that
talk therapy does reduce inflammation
levels and help your immune system. So
just in the same way possibly that
talking to friends has that effect. So
uh talking to your therapist long term
uh will reduce your stress and you can
see that in blood markers as well. the
whole thing is starting to come together
that uh all these different ways of
treating it can be working through
similar pathways that looked so
different through our you know the fact
that we've got so distracted by
Dickart um Freud
um treating the brain as something so
different to the rest of the body.
We have a closing tradition on this
podcast with the last guest leaves a
question for the next not knowing who
they're leaving it for. And the question
for you is, what are you uncontainably
excited about?
>> I'm
uncontainably
excited
about the idea that we can dramatically
improve our lives and our health just by
making the right food choices.
This is really driving me to talk about
it so much to do the studies to do the
science to spread the word because
you know we're seeing all the time the
dramatic effects and I was talking about
the TV program was doing with these you
know these these families that are
really suffering. It just shows you what
you can do if you start treating food
like you would treat medicine. you know,
taking it really seriously and
experimenting with it and noticing those
those differences and um you know, I get
the feedback all the time because I
because the books and the media, people
telling me how their lives have been
transformed and so [snorts] that
feedback keeps me excited on this topic.
And so, um I've never had that in my
career before and it's super exciting.
It's um it's really hard though, isn't
it? And this is I guess the part we
don't talk about much, which is the
psychological part of you know what some
might call discipline in a world we live
in where you go into like I don't know a
gas station or a petrol station or
whatever you call it in different parts
of the world and the options are very
ultrarocessed.
Um and you you live a stressful life.
You're on your phone all day. You're
getting your dopamine fried by watching
short form videos back to back to back
to back to back. you may be, you know,
people are lonier than ever before. So,
making the right choices when we're
controlled by our neurology and our
hormones and how we feel is is often
easier said than done. So, even in the
case of that family that you met, do you
think much about the psychology part of
like discipline when it comes to making
the right choice? And is there any
advice there on how to be more
disciplined with our food choices? Or do
you just think that knowledge is power
in this regard?
>> Well, knowledge is power, but it's not
the only thing. You you need tricks. Um,
we're fighting a food environment.
You know, multi-billion dollar industry
wants us to eat this crap food. your gas
station, they're being bribed to fill
their everything around you with the
worst foods. The worse the food, the
more they pay the supermarkets to have
it in a point where you're going to buy
it. So, you need to have tricks to
counteract that. And not going to a
supermarket is is often one way to avoid
doing [snorts] that. If my house was
filled with crap food, I would probably
be snacking in it. I find it really hard
to throw stuff away. You know, you you
go to workplaces and you see people with
piles of biscuits and uh M&M's uh there.
You know, they should be banned. Um so
there are certain things you say we need
to fight back by changing the rules a
bit. Um just like you wouldn't have, you
know, glasses of vodka in an office uh
for people just have a swig if they
fancy, you shouldn't have candies and
sweets and these things. um in the
current environment where you know we're
fighting a battle like you know they
used to have cigarettes that were free
everywhere we forget um and they change
that environment and the cigarettes are
now really hard to get at that makes it
easier for people to fight the habit
>> and we we often beat ourselves up
because we think of ourselves as being
weak because of this we think ourselves
being like illd disciplined because we
end up reaching for the wrong things but
it is really really hard and it's really
really hard even you know I sit here all
day every day speaking to people that
are experts on these subjects. And you'd
think that would mean that I made
perfect decisions because I've probably
interviewed, you know, more people than
the average 99.99% of the population on
this subject. But I'm a human with
emotions and hormones and life to deal
with. And and so even I have to um
regardless of how much I know about this
stuff now, I still have to like give
myself the best possible chance by
thinking proactively about my
environment at home and even like in the
cart and even at the office. like I have
to think really proactively, put systems
in place to avoid the possibility that I
get really really hungry really really
late at night and my only options are
for example, you know, um which has
been a bit the big change
>> and it's forming habits and that's the
other thing. So it's yeah you got
knowledge then you got these tricks
tricks to avoid often the the worst
offenders and then you've got to come up
with these these new habits that you you
make that are going to break the old
ones. So, you know, rather than reaching
for your breakfast cereal in the
morning, you've got a different one
ready to go. And
often we've found that if you can change
that first meal of the day, it it
becomes a lot easier because that's the
one you're mainly in control of and
realize when the other risky events are.
>> Tim, you've written many, many books.
I'm going to link them all below. This
is the the newest one. I know you're
working on one specifically about the
brain, but I'm very excited for that
one. But this is the newest one called
Ferment.
um unsurprisingly a number one
bestseller yet again. Um but there's a
whole stack of books here. The diet
myth, the real science behind what we
eat. Um Spoonfed, why almost everything
we've been told about food is wrong. And
this book, which has been extremely
successful, um the Food for Life
cookbook with 100 recipes created by
Zoe. I'm going to link all of them below
for anyone that wants to check them out.
And uh thank you so much once again.
>> Been a pleasure as always. you've kept
my audience very very healthy and
they're very appreciative of that. I I I
remember um just the amount of people
that come up to all over the world and
site the conversations we've had in the
past and how that's had been the thing
for them that has helped them to change
their life. And it's pretty remarkable.
It's really remarkable how many people
you must have fundamentally caused to
create different food and dietary
decisions through the work you've done
yourself, through the books, through
Zoe. Um and that's a really special
thing. So, thank you on behalf of all of
them. Well, hopefully we can do millions
more. I hope so. [music]
If there's anything we need, it is
connection. Especially in the world
we're living in today. And that is
exactly why we created these
conversation cards. Because on this
show, when I sit here with my guests and
have those deep, intimate conversations,
this remarkable thing happens time and
time again. We feel deeply connected to
each other. At the end of every episode,
the guest I'm interviewing leaves a
question for the next guest, and we've
turned them into these conversation
cards. And we've added these twist cards
to make your conversations even more
interesting. And there are so many more
twists along the way with the
conversation cards. This is the brand
new edition. And for the first time
ever, I've added to the pack this gold
card, which is an exclusive question
from me. But I'm only putting the gold
cards in the first run of conversation
cards. So get yours now before the
limited edition gold cards are all gone.
Head to the link in the description
below.
>> You take a healthy person's poop and you
transfer it into the person who's sick.
So this is a great example to show how
important our gut microbiome is because
60% of the weight of your stool is your
microbiome. And so I've identified four
things missing in our diet. And when you
do these, [music] you will thrive and
you will live longer and you will have
less disease. And I'm going to take you
through all of these steps right